over the past few years I've had the
chance to work with dozens of gamers and
the more I work with gamers the more I
started to wonder like what's actually
going on in these people's brains in my
Dave job I'm an addiction psychiatrist
so I tend to work with people who have
problems with alcohol or opiates or
marijuana and one of the things that I
have always found really helpful is to
understand how do these substances
actually affect the chemistry in
someone's brain and so the more I work
with gamers the more I realized that
gaming certainly has effects in people's
brains but those effects tend to be a
little bit more subtle than what happens
with biological addictions like alcohol
alcohol for example directly stimulates
certain receptors in your brain that
give you feelings of euphoria and
disinhibition and kind of slowed you
down a little bit
whereas gaming affects your brain in in
slower ways it's not like we're it's not
an actual chemical or physical substance
that's entering your bloodstream and
directly activating parts of your brain
the way that games affect your brain
tend to be in smaller ways and they tend
to affect different parts of your brain
at the same time so the first kind of
circuitry that I wanted to talk about
today is your reward circuitry or your
dopamine circuitry and dopamine is the
primary neurotransmitter that regulates
pleasure in the brain so in there's this
part of the brain called the nucleus
accumbens and when dopamine activity
happens there it's one of the ways in
which we feel pleasure it's like the
pleasure center of our brain if we look
at a lot of drugs of abuse like cocaine
and amphetamines and things like that
those stimulant medication are those
stimulant drugs tend to directly
increase dopamine in our brain which
makes us feel good and euphoric
videogames usually start out that way so
if you stop and think about why is a
video game fun like what makes it fun
it's because there's something going on
with your with the way that you're
interacting with the game and there's
some degree of engagement that causes
this dopamine release to happen
in your brain and so that's what makes a
game fun the interesting thing is the
more I work with gamers and you guys may
feel like this is this happened to you
too there are three discrete phases that
a gamer goes through when they play a
game
the first phase tends to be when the
game is actively fun like the more you
play you're actually enjoying yourself
it's a lot of fun you want to keep
playing it and then over time we're
talking more like months or years not
days as you continue to game regularly
your brain starts to adapt to that
steady degree of dopamine release and
our brain has a very normal mechanism
called homeostasis where it tries to
maintain kind of a balanced state so one
of the ways that homeostasis manifests
is a biological principle we call
tolerance so if you think about someone
who drinks for the first time the
alcohol really like they can get drunk
really quick but if you start to drink
on a regular basis your body develops
tolerance to the alcohol it takes more
and more alcohol to make you feel like
you're drunk because what's happening is
your body is starting to make itself
less sensitive to the effects of alcohol
and gaming is actually no different so
in the first phase of gaming our body
really hasn't acclimatized to that
dopamine release so it starts to feel
really really fun in the second phase we
start to develop tolerance to that
constant stream of dopamine and so what
happens is the game starts to be less
fun when you're playing the game you're
not having as much fun as when you used
to in the second phase it doesn't really
give us a high but it can still remove a
low so some people when they game when
they start to first when they first
start gaming they feel like they're
having fun they feel like it's kind of
like a high and then in the second phase
even though you don't feel the high if
you're feeling bad and you start to game
you can make those negative feelings go
away so if you're feeling stressed out
if you're feeling frustrated if you're
feeling pissed off then there's a chance
that when you play the game those
feelings will kind of go into the
background and we'll talk a little bit
more about emotions so in the first
phase it's kind of giving you a positive
motion in the second phase it's getting
rid of a negative emotion if people
continue to game what actually happens
is they enter this third phase which is
which is also true biological addictions
where it doesn't even take away the
negative emotions and some of you guys
feel like you're kind of trapped in your
gaming it's not even fun for you anymore
but you somehow don't know how to stop
doing it you don't even have fun with it
but it's like you can't you just can't
do anything else and it's not like you
actually enjoy your gaming it's just you
can't stop
and if you've reached that point where
the game doesn't even if you play a game
for 12 hours a day and you actually stop
and think you're not even having fun
during those 12 hours that's really when
you've started to develop a biological
addiction and so what does that actually
mean what's going on in your brain so it
starts off with when you're playing a
game it releases dopamine in this area
called the nucleus accumbens and as the
brain gets used to that dopamine release
it actually starts to decrease its
sensitivity to receive that dopamine
signal so it's kind of like turning the
volume down on you know like a radio
where the strength of the signal of the
radio is the same no matter whether the
volume is up or the volume is down but
you can change the way that that signal
is manifested by adjusting the volume so
it's like your brain is actually turning
down the volume on your dopamine
circuitry because it's getting so much
dopamine all the time overtime this
leads to this state called dopamine
exhaustion where your body is so
chronically used to having that high
level of dopamine from the game that the
volume is turned way down and that
causes huge problems for gamers because
other things that you would normally
find fun start to become less fun
because your dopamine tolerance is so
high and you've hit this point of
dopamine exhaustion when I work with
gamers and you guys let me know if you
feel the same way a lot of what they
tell me is that the game actually isn't
as fun as it used to be but if they try
to do other things they don't find those
other things as fun as well it's like
things that like going out to front with
for dinner is like kind of fun or they
used to do other things like they used
to maybe play like pickup football or
they used to watch more movies or
something like that but that even other
activities outside of gaming become less
fun and that's really really dangerous
because when gamers when you try to stop
gaming what you have to do is you have
to do something else instead so you're
getting out of the house more but the
problem is that when you get out of the
house and you try to do something that
other people consider fun you may find
that you actually don't feel like that
activity is fun and at that point the
gamer concludes oh I don't like X Y or Z
I don't like going to an art museum
because it isn't as fun as the game I
don't like going for a hike or I don't
like hanging out with these other people
because it's just not as fun what you
need to realize as a gamer is that when
you feel like it's not as fun there's
actually a change in your neuro
chemistry that's going to make it so
that any activity that you do that you
would normally find enjoyable is gonna
be dulled because of the way that games
have exhausted your dopamine circuitry
and so what you really have to do and
this is why it's so hard to quit gaming
is give yourself time away from the game
and then your body will reset its
homeostasis to have kind of a normal
dopamine level and once that reset
happens and that can take somewhere
between probably three weeks and two
months to be completely honest you
should start to get some change within
one week but like by three weeks you
should have a decent change and by two
months you should have it kind of be
completely back to normal during that
period of time you just have to
recognize that anything else that you do
may be less fun because of the way that
your dopamine neurocircuitry has been
changed and so when you're thinking
about gaming first ask yourself did you
go through these phases did I first find
that games were a lot of fun did I then
find that games weren't as fun but if I
was having a bad day they still kind of
made me feel better and then the third
phase is if you've hit the point where
you're playing games and you don't even
know why you're playing them anymore you
don't even find them fun but you can't
stop
then chances are you've got this
dopamine circuitry exhaustion problem
and then understand that when you try to
go out into the real world and find
alternatives to gaming because of the
way that your dopamine circuits have
been exhausted you're not going to find
that stuff as fun and if you actually
give yourself a couple of weeks or a
couple of months you'll start to enjoy
activities in a different way that has
nothing to do with your preferences or
your likes or your dislikes it all has
it has everything to do with what your
brain is actually capable of in terms of
feeling enjoyment